[DOC] Add description of a filesystem refactoring approach (#792)
saros-project/saros: docs/contribute/refactoring-filesystem.md

During the beginning of the development of Saros for IntelliJ (Saros/I), some components of Saros/E were extracted to an undependend component (Saros Core). One of the components is the Saros filesystem: the resources.
The design of the Saros filesystem is very simliar to the filesystem of Eclipse IDE.
The Eclipse filesystem can be read here ([here](https://help.eclipse.org/2019-09/topic/org.eclipse.platform.doc.isv/guide/resInt.htm)).

Because the design of the filesystem is similar, so that the implementiation of it for Saros/E was easy.
With the implementation of Saros/I it turned out, that the design of the Saros filesystem is not suitable for Saros/I.
It has several reason, for example, that IntelliJ module can be encapsulate in other IntelliJ modules or the module can have several content roots.
The structure of the IntelliJ filesystem can be read here ([here](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/creating-and-managing-modules.html)) and the comparison to the Eclipse filesystem can be read here ([here](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/migrating-from-eclipse-to-intellij-idea.html))

## The new approach

The new approach is to leave the project-based architecture of Saros:

> A Saros user should be able to share an any subtree of hin resources with Saros. The root of the subtree must have an absolute path on each Saros user's enviroment. It doesn't matter, where the the subtree is located (ex. On *C*: oder *D*: drive), but what the absolute pathes unites is, that they mean the same reference (IReferencePoint). Every Saros instance should know, where an IReferencePoint object is located in the local file system, so that the resources can be determined in combination of an IReferencePoint and a relative path to the resource.

Reviewer: I am not sure what you mean with "...but what the absolute pathes unites is, that they mean the same reference (IReferencePoint)". Please, explain this.

Author: Every Saros user can choose for themselves where the resources are located. If a user uses Windows, the resources can be located in C: or D: drive. If a user uses Linux, the resources can be located in /home/....
So the absolute paths of the resources are different, but if they start a session and want sharing their resources, the resources have the same reference point even though they have different absolute paths.

Author: @m273d15  Should I rewrite this or was the explanation enough?

The IReferencePoint can be look like this:

> public interface IReferencePoint {
>          /* Nothing here */
>          }

Every resource knows their reference point, so that a reference point is easy accessable, but not the other way around.

### Current Situation
The current situation is, that all resources belongs to their projects. 

> For example: all actions of a Saros user, like editing a file, creating a new folder, move files) are called activities. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, all actions of a Saros user (like editing a file, creating a new folder, move files) are called activities. 
```

> The acitivities contains a global project id (all shared project gets an unique id for all Saros instances in a session) and a relative path to the affected resource outgoing from the project. Every Saros instance knows which id belongs to which project, so it can process the activities and determining the resources easily.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The activities contain a global project id (each shared project gets a unique id for all Saros instances in a session) and a relative path to the affected resource outgoing from the project. Every Saros instance knows which id belongs to which project, so it can process the activities and determine the resources easily.
```

### Design of new filesystem

> Because every Saros instance knows, where the reference point is located in the local filesystem, the Saros' filesystem can be simplified. Saros should not know anymore, if a resource is `IWorkspace` or `IProject`. Saros must distinguish resources between files and folders, so that the design of the filesystem can look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because every Saros instance knows, where the reference point is located in the local filesystem, the Saros' filesystem can be simplified. Saros should not know anymore if a resource is `IWorkspace` or `IProject`. Saros must distinguish resources between files and folders so that the design of the filesystem can look like this:
```

> A Saros filesystem consist of resources, called `IResource`. It contains its `IReferencePoint` and can either be an `IFolder` or an `IFile`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Saros filesystem consists of resources, called `IResource`. It contains its `IReferencePoint` and can either be an `IFolder` or an `IFile`.
```

## Concepts how to reach the final state

> The refactoring of the project-based architecture to a reference point based one is very complicated. Especially the relationsships between the components needs a long analysis to find an effictive strategy to refactor Saros.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The refactoring of the project-based architecture to a reference point based one is very complicated. Especially the relationship between the components needs a long analysis to find an effective strategy to refactor Saros.
```

> An important strategy for the refactory is to build the reference point based architecture, but also keeping the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An important strategy for the refactoring is to build the reference point based architecture, but also keeping the 
```

> project-based architrecture simultaneously until the refactoring is completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
project-based architecture simultaneously until the refactoring is completed.
```

> For providing the dual based architecture a special mapper is needed, which maps the reference point to the IDE specific file system resources. Because every components has different resources, a special mapper (ReferencePointManager) is requiered for each  of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For providing the dual based architecture a special mapper is needed, which maps the reference point to the IDE specific file system resources. Because every component has different resources, a special mapper (ReferencePointManager) is required for each of them.
```

### Saros Core
Saros Core needs a mapper, which is called CoreReferencePointManager, with following features:

> 1.  It maps a reference points object to a Saros project object internally 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It maps a reference points object to a Saros project object internally 
```

2. It provides the functionalities of the Saros project

> Because a reference point itself has no methods, it is important that the CoreReferencePointManager provides functionalities of a Saros project, so that co-existance of both architecture is possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because a reference point itself has no methods, it is important that the CoreReferencePointManager provides functionalities of a Saros project, so that the co-existence of both architectures is possible.
```

### Saros/E

> In situations, like processing activities, Saros/E converts Saros resources backs to Eclipse resource. So it is very useful, that the mapper in Saros/E gets the features, that it determinates Eclipse resources given by reference points and relative paths to the resources. This mapper is called EclipseReferencePointManager and has following features:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In situations, like processing activities, Saros/E converts Saros resources backs to Eclipse resource. So it is very useful, that the mapper in Saros/E gets the features to determine Eclipse resources given by reference points and relative paths to the resources. This mapper is called EclipseReferencePointManager and has the following features:
```

> 1.  It maps a reference point object to an Eclipse project internally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It maps a reference point object to an Eclipse project internally
```

> 2.  It determines Eclipse resources in combination of reference points and relative paths to the resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. It determines Eclipse resources based on a combination of reference points and relative paths to the resources
```

### Saros/I

The IntelliJReferencePointManager is needed for Saros/I and has two responsibilities:

> 1.  It maps a reference point object to an IntelliJ Module internally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It maps a reference point object to an IntelliJ module internally
```

> 2.  It determines java resources in combination of reference points and relative paths to the resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. It determines java resources based on a combination of reference points and relative paths to the resources
```

### Saros Server

The ServerReferencePointManager is needed for Saros Server and has two responsibilities:

> 1.  It maps a reference point object to an Java IO file resource internally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It maps a reference point object to a Java IO file resource internally
```

> 2.  It determines java resources in combination of reference points and relative paths to the resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. It determines java resources based on a combination of reference points and relative paths to the resources
```

> All ReferencePointManager are not needed only during the refactoring. There are also needed especially handling Saros activities (ex. A saros resources was created). All activities contains a Saros path (SPath), which consists of a Saros project and a relative path to the resource, which the activity triggered. The Spath has additionally feature: It also returns the affected Saros resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All ReferencePointManager's are also needed after the refactoring. They are useful especially for handling Saros activities (e.g. A saros resource was created). All activities contain a Saros path (SPath), which consists of a Saros project and a relative path to the resource, which the activity triggered. The SPath has additional features: It also returns the affected Saros resources.
```
Do you want to describe why the ReferencePointManagers are still useful in the context of the SPath? I don't really understand what you want to express. Is the last sentence "It also returns the affected Saros resources" a reason for using the ReferencePointManager?

Author: I wanted to explain why the ReferencePointManagers are needed. 

1. During the refactoring for providing the co-existence of the referencepoint- and project-based architectures.
2. After the refactoring (but also during the refactoring): It's not possible to determine resources (IDE-dependent or Saros resources), if you only have a reference point and a relative path. Because the ReferencePointManager maps a reference point to a (container) resource (like Eclipse project or IntelliJ module), you can get the mapped object and can determine the resource with the relative path.

The SPath is a special case: The current situation is, that the SPath contains a Saros project object and a IPath object as relative path. A SPath instance can return contained the Saros project and IPath object, but can also determine and return resources in the combination Saros project and IPath as relative path. After the refactoring, the SPath will contain a reference point and an IPath. Determining resources without a ReferencePointManager is not possible, so the functions like getFolder(), getFile() in SPath wont work anymore and will be removed.
But if you want to get the resource from the SPath, the ReferencePointManager can be used for this.

Author: @m273d15  Should I rewrite this or is this explanation enough?

> With the refactoring to reference points, the ReferencePointManager can be very helpful handling activities, especially determining the IDE depended resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the refactoring to reference points, the ReferencePointManager can be very helpful in handling activities, especially determining the IDE dependent resources.
```

> ### Imported Refactoring Steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Important Refactoring Steps
```
?

> For introducing the reference point based interfaces, but also keeping project-based interfaces during the refactoring, follwing steps are useful:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For introducing the reference point based interfaces, but also keeping project-based interfaces during the refactoring, the following steps are useful:
```

> 1.  Mark project-based interface as deprecated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Mark project-based interface as deprecated
```

> 2.  Insert the reference point based interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Insert the reference point based interface
```

> 3.  Implement the reference point based interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Implement the reference point based interface
```

> 4.  Remove the project-based interface's implementation and reference this to the reference point based interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Remove the project-based interface implementation and reference this to the reference point based interface
```
What do you mean with "reference this to the reference point based interface"?

> 5.  Find alle usages of project-based interfaces and reference them to reference point based interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Find all usages of project-based interfaces and substitute them with corresponding calls to reference point based interfaces
```

> 6.  Delete project based interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Delete project-based interfaces
```

> This procedure has the adventages, that the parallel development of Saros is provided, so that developer can use the reference point based interfaces and the (still) untouched components are not affected directly. After all usages references the reference point based interface, the project based one can be deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This procedure has the advantages, that the parallel development of Saros is provided so that developers can use the reference point based interfaces and the (still) untouched components are not affected directly. After the reference point based interfaces are fully adopted, the project-based interfaces can be deleted.
```

> There are other refactoring situations to handle for reaching to final state:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are other refactoring situations to handle for reaching the final state:
```

#### Rename Class/Methods:

> Because of the project-based architecture many classes and methods contains the key word project, like SharedProjectMapper. After adjusting to reference points, the naming of them could lead to confusion, so the classes and methods must be renamed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of the project-based architecture, many classes and methods contain the keyword "project" (like SharedProjectMapper). After using reference points, the old naming could lead to confusion, so the classes and methods must be renamed.
```

#### Insert Parameter:

> There are some situations during the refactoring, that a Saros project for example determated resources, which the reference point can not do. So the affected methods should be extended by a ReferencePointManager, so that previous functionalities still remains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some situations during the refactoring, that a Saros project, determines resources, which the reference point can not do. So the affected methods should be extended by a ReferencePointManager so that previous functionalities still remain.
```

> 

Reviewer: I think the remaining hints below are common sense and could be removed. If you remove this, please rename the previous paragraph (e.g. "Insert Parameter" -> "Add ReferencePointManager").

#### Remove Parameter:

> There are some classes, that a ReferencePointManager not only needed as a parameter extension for the methods, but as a class variable. Because the ReferencePointManager exists as a class variable, the method extensions can be reverted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some classes, that need a ReferencePointManager as a class variable. In this case, previously inserted parameters (as described above) can be reverted.
```

#### Pull up field:

> If two  sub classes have the same super class and field (ex: the same ReferencePointManager), the field can be pull up to the super class and removed in the sub classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If two subclasses have the same superclass and field (ex: the same ReferencePointManager), the field can be pull up to the superclass and removed in the subclasses.
```
